feat: add postgreSQL Hooks docs (#19310)
supabase/supabase: apps/docs/pages/guides/auth/auth-hooks.mdx

Hooks help you:

- Track the origin of user signups by adding metadata
- Improve security by adding additional checks to password and multi-factor authentication
- Support legacy systems by integrating with identity credentials from external authentication systems
- Add additional custom claims to your JWT

You can use hooks at specific points along an Auth flow to perform custom behavior via Postgres Functions. The following hooks are available:

| Hook                          | Available on Plan    |
| ----------------------------- | -------------------- |
| Custom Access Token           | Free, Pro            |
| MFA Verification Attempt      | Teams and Enterprise |
| Password Verification Attempt | Teams and Enterprise |

You can connect a hook to Supabase Auth to signal to Supabase Auth that it should make use of the hook.

Below is a flow chart illustrating how Supabase Auth uses an Auth Hook:

<Image
  alt="Auth Hooks Flowchart"
  width={'1000'}
  height={'400'}
  src="/docs/img/guides/auth-hooks/hooks-flowchart.png"
/>

## Create a Hook

### What is a Hook

> A hook is a [Postgres Function](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createfunction.html) that takes in a `jsonb` object and return a `jsonb` object. You can transform the `jsonb` input in the body of the hook via native operators such as [JSON operators](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/16/functions-json.html) or extensions such as [plv8](https://supabase.com/docs/guides/database/extensions/plv8).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A hook is a [Postgres Function](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createfunction.html) with a single argument -- the `event` of type [JSONB]() -- and which returns a JSONB object.

This function is invoked by Supabase Auth at its point in the flow by providing an event object. The object returned by the function gives instructions on how Supabase Auth should continue processing.

To access properties of the `event` argument, you can use the [JSON operators and functions](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/functions-json.html). 

There are no restrictions as to what language can be used to write Auth Hooks. If [PL/pgSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/plpgsql.html) is too difficult consider using the [plv8](/docs/guides/database/extensions/plv8) extension which lets you use JavaScript to define functions.
```

> A hook is a [Postgres Function](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createfunction.html) that takes in a `jsonb` object and return a `jsonb` object. You can transform the `jsonb` input in the body of the hook via native operators such as [JSON operators](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/16/functions-json.html) or extensions such as [plv8](https://supabase.com/docs/guides/database/extensions/plv8) which allow you to use JavaScript within Postgres.

Author: ```suggestion
A hook is a [Postgres Function](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createfunction.html) that takes in a `jsonb` object and return a `jsonb` object. You can transform the `jsonb` input in the body of the hook via native operators such as [JSON operators](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/16/functions-json.html) or extensions such as [plv8](https://supabase.com/docs/guides/database/extensions/plv8).
```

> <Admonition type="caution">
>   The `?` JSONB operator is not supported as it conflicts with our ORM.
> </Admonition>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Admonition type="caution">
  If you're using the Supabase SQL Editor, there's an issue when using the `?` (*Does the string exist as a top-level key within the JSON value?*) operator. Use a direct connection to the database if you need to use it when defining a function.
</Admonition>
```

> A hook typically has the following signature:

Author: ```suggestion
Here is an example hook signature:
```

```sql
create or replace function public.custom_access_token_hook(event jsonb)
returns jsonb
language plpgsql
as $$
declare
  -- Insert variables here
begin
  -- Insert logic here
  return event;
end;
$$;
```

You can visit `SQL Editor > Templates` for hook templates.

### Hook grants and roles

You need to assign additional permissions so that Supabase Auth can access the hook as well as the tables it interacts with.

The `supabase_auth_admin` role does not have permissions to the `public` schema. You need to grant the role permission to execute your hook function:

```sql
grant execute
  on function public.custom_access_token_hook
  to supabase_auth_admin;
```

Also revoke permissions from the `authenticated` and `anon` roles to ensure the function is not accessible by Supabase Serverless APIs.

```sql
revoke execute
  on function public.custom_access_token_hook
  from authenticated, anon;
```

> For security, we recommend against the use the `security definer` tag. The `security definer` tag specifies that the function is to be executed with the privileges of the user that owns it. When a function is created via the Supabase dashboard with the tag, it will have the extensive permissions of the `postgres` role which could allow for undesirable actions to occur.

Author: ```suggestion
For security, we recommend against the use the `security definer` tag. The `security definer` tag specifies that the function is to be executed with the privileges of the user that owns it. When a function is created via the Supabase dashboard with the tag, it will have the extensive permissions of the `postgres` role which make it easier for undesirable actions to occur.
```

We recommend that you do not use any tag and explicitly grant permissions to `supabase_auth_admin` as described above.

Read more about `security definer` tag [in our database guide](/docs/guides/database/functions#security-definer-vs-invoker).

### Hook errors

You should return an error when facing a runtime error. Runtime errors are specific to your application and arise from specific business rules rather than programmer errors.

Runtime errors could happen when:

- The user does not have appropriate permissions
- The event payload received does not have required claims.
- The user has performed an action which violates a business rule.

The error is a JSON object and has the following properties:

- `error` An object that contains information about the error.
  - `http_code` A number indicating the HTTP code to be returned. If not set, the code is HTTP 500 Internal Server Error.
  - `message` A message to be returned in the HTTP response. Required.

Here's an example:

```json
{
  "error": {
    "http_code": 429,
    "message": "You can only verify a factor once every 10 seconds."
  }
}
```

> When an error is returned, the error is propagated upwards and translated into a HTTP error which is then returned to your application. Supabase Auth will only take into account the error and disregard the rest of the payload.

Author: ```suggestion
When an error is returned, the error is propagated from the hook to Supabase Auth and translated into a HTTP error which is returned to your application. Supabase Auth will only take into account the error and disregard the rest of the payload.
```

- Limit the number of verification attempts performed over a period of time.
- Sign out users who have too many invalid verification attempts.
- Count, rate limit, or ban sign-ins.

**Inputs**

Supabase Auth will supply the following fields to your hook:

- `factor_id` Unique identifier for the MFA factor being verified.
- `user_id` Unique identifier for the user.
- `valid` Whether the verification attempt was valid. For TOTP, this means that the six digit code was correct (true) or incorrect (false).

Example payload:

```json
{
  "factor_id": "6eab6a69-7766-48bf-95d8-bd8f606894db",
  "user_id": "3919cb6e-4215-4478-a960-6d3454326cec",
  "valid": true
}
```

**Outputs**

Return this if your hook processed the input without errors.

- `decision` A string containing the decision on whether to allow authentication to move forward. Use `reject` to deny the verification attempt and log the user out of all active sessions. Use `continue` to use the default Supabase Auth behavior.
- `message` The message to show the user if the decision was `reject`.

Example output:

```json
{
  "decision": "reject",
  "message": "You have exceeded maximum number of MFA attempts."
}
```

**Examples**

> <Tabs

Reviewer: For all tabs in the doc, can you check how we can have the first example be active and not hidden?

        return jsonb_build_object(
          'error', jsonb_build_object(
            'http_code', coalesce(http_code, 0),
            'message', coalesce(error_message ->> 'message', 'error sending email')
          )
        );
      end if;
    end if;

    -- Continue with default behavior
    return jsonb_build_object('decision', 'continue');
  end;
$$;

-- Assign appropriate permissions
grant execute
  on function public.hook_notify_user_on_failed_attempts
  to supabase_auth_admin;

revoke execute
  on function public.hook_notify_user_on_failed_attempts
  from authenticated, anon;

grant all
  on table public.password_sign_in_attempts
  to supabase_auth_admin;

revoke all
  on table public.password_sign_in_attempts
  from authenticated, anon;
```

</TabPanel>
</Tabs>

## Hook: Custom Access Token

The custom access token hook runs before a token is issued and allows you to add additional claims based on the authentication method used.

Claims returned must conform to our specification. Supabase Auth will check for these claims after the hook is run and return an error if they are not present.

These are the fields currently available on an access token:

> | Field           | Required |

Reviewer: This table renders really terribly. Maybe you can convert these into two lists:

Example:

- Required claims: `aud`, ...
- Optional claims: `jti`, ...

| --------------- | -------- |
| `aud`           | Yes      |
| `exp`           | Yes      |
| `jti`           | No       |
| `iat`           | Yes      |
| `iss`           | No       |
| `nbf`           | No       |
| `sub`           | Yes      |
| `email`         | Yes      |
| `phone`         | Yes      |
| `app_metadata`  | No       |
| `user_metadata` | No       |
| `role`          | Yes      |
| `aal`           | Yes      |
| `amr`           | No       |

> | `session_id`    | No       |

Reviewer: This should be a required claim.

For convenience, we enable the `plv8` extension under [`Database > Extensions`](/dashboard/project/_/database/extensions) to run JavaScript within our query.

Create a `profiles` table to hold information:

```sql
create table profiles (
  user_id uuid not null primary key references auth.users (id),
  level integer,
  is_admin boolean not null default false
);
```

```javascript
create or replace function custom_access_token_hook(event jsonb)
returns jsonb
language plv8
as $$
  var user_level;

  // Fetch the current user's level from the profiles table
  var result = plv8.execute("select level from public.profiles where user_id = $1", [event.user_id]);
  if (result.length > 0) {
    user_level = result[0].level;
  } else {
    // Assign a default level of 0 if no level is found
    user_level = 0;
  }

  // Check if 'claims' exists in the event object; if not, initialize it
  if (!event.claims) {
    event.claims = {};
  }

  // Update the level in the claims
  event.claims.level = user_level;

  return event;
$$;
```

</TabPanel>
<TabPanel id="restrict-access-to-sso-users" label="Restrict access to SSO users">

> You can restrict access to internal applications with a hook. For example, you require that employees log in via [SAML Single Sign On (SSO)](/docs/guides/auth/sso/auth-sso-saml). You can exempt some employees from the policy via an allowlist.

Author: ```suggestion
You can restrict access to internal applications with a hook. For example, you can require that employees log in via [SAML Single Sign On (SSO)](/docs/guides/auth/sso/auth-sso-saml). You can exempt select employees from the policy via an allowlist.
```

grant all
  on table public.password_failed_verification_attempts
  to supabase_auth_admin;

revoke execute
  on function public.hook_password_verification_attempt
  from authenticated, anon;

revoke all
  on table public.password_failed_verification_attempts
  from authenticated, anon;
```

</TabPanel>
<TabPanel id="send-email-on-failed-password-attempt" label="Send email notification on failed password attempts">

You can notify a user via email instead of blocking the user. To do so, make use of [Supabase Vault](/docs/guides/database/vault) to store the API Key of our mail provider and use [`pg_net`](/docs/guides/database/extensions/pg_net) to send a HTTP request to our email provider to send the email. Ensure that you have configured a sender signature for the email account which you are sending emails from.

First, create a table to track sign in attempts.

```sql
create table public.password_sign_in_attempts (
  user_id uuid not null,
  attempt_id uuid not null,
  last_attempt_at timestamp not null default now(),
  attempt_successful boolean not null,
  primary key (user_id, attempt_id)
);
```

Next, store the API key of our email API provider:

```sql

> select vault.create_secret('my_api_key', 'my_api_key_name', 'my_email_provider_api_key');

Author: ```suggestion
select vault.create_secret('my_api_key', 'my_api_key_name', 'description_of_my_api_key');
```

```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

        claims := jsonb_set(claims, '{user_metadata}', '{}');
      end if;

      -- Set a claim of 'admin'
      claims := jsonb_set(claims, '{user_metadata, admin}', 'true');

      -- Update the 'claims' object in the original event
      event := jsonb_set(event, '{claims}', claims);
    end if;

    -- Return the modified or original event
    return event;
  end;
$$;

grant execute
  on function public.custom_access_token_hook
  to supabase_auth_admin;

revoke execute
  on function public.custom_access_token_hook
  from authenticated, anon;
```

</TabPanel>
<TabPanel id="add-metadata-claim-plv8" label="Add claim via plv8">
You can add custom claims to the access token. In this example, we fetch the level of an existing user from the `profiles` table and assign new users a default level of zero.

For convenience, we enable the `plv8` extension under [`Database > Extensions`](/dashboard/project/_/database/extensions) to run JavaScript within our query.

Create a `profiles` table to hold information:

```sql
create table profiles (
  user_id uuid not null primary key references auth.users (id),
  level integer,
  is_admin boolean not null default false
);
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

    select is_admin into is_admin from profiles where user_id = event->>'user_id';

    -- Proceed only if the user is an admin
    if is_admin then
      claims := event->'claims';

      -- Check if 'user_metadata' exists in claims
      if jsonb_typeof(claims->'user_metadata') is null then
        -- If 'user_metadata' does not exist, create an empty object
        claims := jsonb_set(claims, '{user_metadata}', '{}');
      end if;

      -- Set a claim of 'admin'
      claims := jsonb_set(claims, '{user_metadata, admin}', 'true');

      -- Update the 'claims' object in the original event
      event := jsonb_set(event, '{claims}', claims);
    end if;

    -- Return the modified or original event
    return event;
  end;
$$;

grant execute
  on function public.custom_access_token_hook
  to supabase_auth_admin;

revoke execute
  on function public.custom_access_token_hook
  from authenticated, anon;
```

</TabPanel>
<TabPanel id="add-metadata-claim-plv8" label="Add claim via plv8">
You can add custom claims to the access token. In this example, we fetch the level of an existing user from the `profiles` table and assign new users a default level of zero.

> For convenience, we enable the `plv8` extension so that we can run JavaScript within our query.

Author: ```suggestion
We enable the `plv8` extension to run JavaScript within our query.
```
